---
layout: layouts/blog.liquid
title: "The Obesity Code"
tags: [notes, book-notes]
date: 2019-04-07
permalink: note/obesity-code/
---

[The Obesity Code by Jason Fung](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24945404-the-obesity-code)

I really enjoyed this book. Dr. Fung does a great job by providing a framework for obesity and health. There are a lot of ideas in this book, so I decided to take some notes for reference.

## Insulin and Insuling resistance are the main causes of obesity
- **Calories-in and Calories-out are not independent** 

Our body has a **set weight** that is controlled by the [Hypothalamus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothalamus). Receptors in the hypothalamus react to [leptin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leptin) - hormone generated by fat cells to satiate hunger and maintain homeostasis.

- Our *body set weight* is sensitive to Insulin levels.

- High Insulin levels cause obesity. Yes, there is a causal relation.

- [Cortisol](https://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/what-is-cortisol#1) is a hormone released during "stress" or "high energy emergency" where burst of energy is required. Different cells have cortisol receptors and perform different functions. It is known to affect blood sugar, by affecting insulin levels causally.

- The body set weight or homeostasis level, is affected by insulin.

- **[Insulin resistance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insulin_resistance)**: The hidden factor that affects obesity. Higher insulin resistance essentially means that for absorbing a given amount of glucose from blood, more insulin is needed. This causes higher insulin levels. The problem with this is that this resistance is compartmentalized. i.e. Different cells have different resistance levels. Mainly, these different compartments refer to muscle, liver and hypothalamus. Thus, higher insulin resistance in liver/muscle causes an increased secretion of insulin, thereby increasing the body set weight eventually. Constant exposure to insulin can cause insulin resistance. Thus, ideas such as small meals throughout the day is bad for obesity.

- *Paradox of asian white rice eater*:
**Sugar basics**: Simple sugars are glucose, fructose and sucrose (glucose + fructose). Fructose is the hidden bad dude that increases insulin resistance. (Mainly at the liver, as only the liver can process sucrose and produce glucose/fats that other cells can absorb) Asians typically eat white rice, which is low in sucrose (hence fructose) and thus, this does not directly affect insulin resistance. But, once soft drinks and other refined sugars (with fructose) became popular, it was a disaster. Increased insulin resistance combined with the high carb diet was a vicious cycle leading to obesity. Thus, to avoid weight again avoid refined sugars.

- **Diet soda delusion**: Diet soda controls the intake of sugars but still affects insulin levels. Hence it does not reduce chances of obesity. Unfortunately, "Sugar-free" substitutes in general affect insulin levels.

- **Obesity is a multifactorial disease**. We can only control about 30% of insulin secretion through diet. Other factors include Sleep deprivation, stress,  mom's insulin levels (can affect the baby's insulin resistance)

- **Fat-phobia:** All fat is not bad. Infact Saturated fat has been associated with lower risk of heart disease. The bad guy is Trans fat, i.e hydrogenated unsaturated fat. This is different from naturally occurring saturated fat like coconut oil.

## What to do?
All diets work short term, but modifying body set weight is key.  There is no one single cause for obesity, its multi-factorial in nature. Insulin is the most important (or most controllable) among the factors.
- **Reduce sugar intake**. It directly affects insulin and insulin resistance.
- **Read labels**. Most sugar presence are concealed with Maltose, fructose, sucrose, agave nectar.
- **Avoid desserts as much as possible**. Its just sugar. Replace it with natural sugars like fruit with some cream or nuts, dark chocolate.
- **Don't snack!** Constant insulin = increase in insulin resistance.
- **Eat a decent breakfast, when required**. Keep it small. No sugary cereals.  Steel cut oats, whole oats with higher fiber is better than sweetened/disguised oats. (Like instant oats or some rolled oats) Eggs are good.
- **Coffee is better than we thought**. There are positive correlations with coffee and longer life, reduced risk of diabetes, etc.
- Tea and water are great.
- Alcohol is generally okay, but sweeter ones contain residual sugar, which is not good.
- Refined grains are to be avoided. Empty and causes insulin spikes. Prefer whole grains and whole wheat. Unprocessed is key!
- Chia seeds, Quinoa are good. Beans are a good source of carbs. Moderate protein intake, natural proteins >> processed ones like meal replacement shake, protein powder, protein bars, etc.
- Natural fats are great. Nuts, oils.
- Increase Fiber and Vinegar intake.

## When to eat?
- Intermittent fasting is found to be associated with lower insulin and insulin resistance.
- Best way to fast - Skip a few meals in the week!
- Fast by includes tea/coffee to make it easier. No sugar, but small amount of milk is okay. Add cinnamon, lemon, spices etc to coffee, tea, water to make it easier. Vegetable broth with a pinch of salt is also okay.

*Finally, as obesity is a multifactorial problem, diet, stress (cortisol), sleep deprivation, etc. can all affect obesity in different ways. See what works for you in this framework. Stress and sleep deprivation can be tackled with exercise, meditation, massage, social activity, etc.*


